in this video I'd like to tell you about
learning curves learning curves is often
a very useful thing to plot if either
you want to sanity check that your
algorithm is working correctly or if you
want to improve the performance of the
algorithm and learning curves is a tool
that I actually use very often to try to
diagnose if a particular learning
algorithm may be suffering from a bias
or variance problem or a bit of both
case what a learning curve is to plot a
learning curve what I usually do is plot
J train which is the say average squared
error on my training set or J CV which
is the average squared error on my cross
validation set and I'm going to plot
that as a function of M that is of as a
function of the number of training
examples I have and so M is usually a
constant like maybe I just have you know
100 training examples but what I'm going
to do is artificially reduce my training
set size so that deliberately limit
myself to using only say 10 or 20 or 30
or 40 training examples and plots what
the training error is and what the
cross-validation error is for these
smaller training set sizes so let's see
what these parts might look like
suppose I have only one training example
like that shown in this first example
here and let's say I'm fitting a
quadratic function well if I have only
one training example I'm going to be the
fitted perfectly right this you know for
the quadratic function going to have
zero error on the one training example
if I have two training examples well
with a quadratic function that can also
fit that very well so even if I were
using regularization I can probably fit
this quite well and if I'm using the
regularization i pre lifted this
perfectly and if I have three training
examples again you can fit the quadratic
function perfectly so if M equals 1 or M
equals 2 or M equals 3 my training error
on my training set is going to be 0
assuming I'm not using
or it may be slightly larger than 0 if I
am using regularization and by the way
if I have a large training set and I'm
artificially restricting the size of my
training set in order to apply j-train
here if I set M equals 3 say and I train
on only 3 examples then for this figure
I'm going to measure my training error
only on the three examples that I
actually fit my data to and so even if I
have say 100 training examples but if I
want to plot what my training error is
for M equals 3 what I'm going to do is
measure my training error only on the
three examples that I've actually fit my
hypothesis to and not on all the other
examples that I had deliberately omitted
from the training process so just to
summarize what we've seen is that if the
training set size is small then the
training error is going to be small as
well because you know you have a small
training set it's going to be very easy
to fit your training set very well maybe
even perfectly now say I have M equals 4
examples well then the quadratic
function can no longer fit this data set
perfectly and if I have M equals 5 then
you know maybe a quadratic function can
fit this data or so so but as my
training set gets larger it becomes
harder and harder to ensure that I can
find the quadratic function that passes
through all my examples perfectly so in
fact as the training set size grows what
you find is that my average training
error actually increases and so if you
plot this figure what you find is that
the training set error that is the
average error on your hypothesis grows
as M grows and just to repeat the
intuition is that when M is small when
you have very few training examples it's
pretty easy to fit every single one of
your training examples perfectly and so
your error is going to be small whereas
when M is larger then it gets somewhat
harder to fit all the new training
examples perfectly
your training set error becomes a little
bit larger now how about the cross
validation error
well the cross validation error is my
error on this cross validation set that
I haven't seen and so you know when I
have a very small training set
I'm not going to generalize well what
just not going to do well in that so
right this this hypothesis here doesn't
look like a good one and is only when I
get to a larger training set that you
know I'm starting to get hypotheses that
maybe fit the data somewhat better so
your cross-validation error and your
test set error will tend to decrease as
your training set size increases because
the more data you have the better you do
at generalizing to new examples or just
the more data you have the better the
hypothesis you fit so if you plot J
train and JCV this is the sort of figure
you get now let's look at what the
learning curves may look like if we have
either high bias or high variance
problems suppose your hypothesis has
high bias and to explain this I'm going
to use our stand an example of fitting a
straight line to data that you know
can't really be fit well by a straight
line so we end up with a hypothesis that
maybe looks like that now let's think
what would happen if we were to increase
the training set size so if instead of 5
examples like what's drawn there imagine
that we have a lot more training
examples well what happens if you fit a
straight line to this what you find is
that you end up with you know pretty
much the same straight line
I mean you destroy a line just conflict
this data and getting a ton more data
well the straight line isn't going to
change that much this is the best
possible straight line fit to this data
but the straight line just can't fit
this data set that well so if you plot
the cross-validation error this is what
it will look like over here on the left
if you have a very miniscule training
set size that you have you know maybe
just one training example it's not going
to do well but by the time you've
reached a certain number of training
examples you've almost fit the best
possible straight line and even if you
end up with a much larger training set
with much larger value of em you know
you're basically getting the same
straight line and so the
cross-validation error let me label that
what test set error will plateau out or
flatten out pretty soon once you've
reached beyond a certain number of
training examples so that you pretty
much fit the best possible straight line
and how about training error
well the training error will again be
small and what you find in the high bias
case is that the training error will end
up close to the cross validation error
because you have so few parameters in so
much data at least when M is large the
performance on the training set and when
the cross-validation set would be very
similar and so this is what your
learning curves will look like before if
you have an algorithm that has high bias
and finally the problem of high bias is
reflected in the fact that both the
cross validation and error and the
training error are high and so you end
up with a relatively high value of both
JCV and the j-train this also implies
something very interesting which is that
if a learning algorithm that has high
bias as we get more and more training
examples that is as we move to the right
to this figure will notice that the
cross-validation error isn't going down
much it's basically flattened out and so
if a learning algorithm is already
suffering from high bias getting more
training data by itself will actually
not help that much and there's a
complete example in the figure on the
right here we had only five training
examples and we fit a certain straight
line and when we had a ton more training
data we still ended up with roughly the
same straight line and so the learning
algorithm has high bias just give me a
lot more training data that doesn't
actually help you get a much lower cross
validation error or test set error so
knowing if your learning algorithm is
suffering from high bias seems like a
useful thing to know
this can prevent you from wasting a lot
of time collecting more training data
where it might just not end up being
helpful next let's look at the setting
of a learning algorithm that may have
high variance let's first look at the
training error if you have a very small
training set like five training examples
shown on the figure on the right and if
we're fitting say a very high order
polynomial I've written 100 degree 100
degree polynomial which really no one
uses but just for illustration and if
we're using a fairly small value of
lambda maybe not maybe not zero but
fairly small value of lambda then we'll
end up you know fitting this data very
well that with a function that over fit
says so if the training set size is
small our training error does J train of
theta will be small and as this training
set size increases a bit you know we may
still be overfitting this data a little
bit but it also becomes slightly harder
to fit this data set perfectly and so as
a training set size increases we'll find
that J train increases because it's just
a little harder to fit the training set
perfectly when we have more examples but
the training set error will still be
pretty low now how about the cross
validation error well in the high
variance setting our hypothesis is
overfitting and so the cross-validation
error will remain high even as we get
you know a moderate number of training
examples and so maybe the cross
validation error may look like that and
the indicative diagnostic that we have a
high variance problem is the fact that
there's this large gap between the
training error and the cross-validation
error and looking at this figure if we
think about adding more training data
that is taking this figure and
extrapolating to the right we can kind
of tell that you know the two curves the
blue curve and the magenta curve are
converging to each other and so if we
were to extrapolate this figure to the
right
then it seems likely that the training
error would keep on going up and the
cross-validation error would keep on
going down and the thing we really care
about is the cross-validation error or
the test set error right and so in this
sort of figure I can kind of tell that
you know if we keep on adding training
examples to extrapolate to the right
well our cross validation error will
keep on coming down and so any high
variance setting getting more training
data is indeed likely to help and so
this again seems like a useful thing to
know if your learning algorithm is
suffering from a high variance problem
because that tells you for example then
it may be worth your while to see if you
can go and get some more training data
now on the previous slide and this slide
I've drawn fairly clean fairly idealized
curves if you plot these curves for an
actual learning algorithm sometimes you
will actually see you know pretty much
curves like what I've drawn here
although sometimes you see curves a
little bit noisier a little bit Messier
than this but plotting learning curves
like these can often tell you that can
often help you figure out if your
learning algorithm is suffering from
bias or variance or even a little bit
ago so when I'm trying to improve the
performance of a learning algorithm one
thing that I'll almost always do is plot
these learning curves and usually this
will give you a better sense of where
this adviser variance problem
and in the next video we'll see how this
can help suggest specific actions to
take or to not take in order to try to
improve the performance of your learning
algorithm